Egypt's government has announced it will
now support the lawsuit filed by South
Africa the international court of
justice accusing Israel of genocide the
Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
said in light of the increasing severity
and scope of Israeli aggressions against
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip
we call on Israel to comply with its
obligations as the occupying power and
its implementation of the interim
measures issued by the international
court of justice we renew our call on
the security Council and the influential
International parties to immediately
move to a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip
well in January the icj ordered Israel
to prevent acts of genocide in Gaza
within that ruling was an order to
prevent killing and serious bodily and
mental harm to the Palestinian people
measures must also be taken to prevent
and punish the incitement of genocide
allowing basic services and Aid into
Gaza and to prevent the destruction of
evidence of possible war crimes but
since January rights groups such as
Amnesty International and Human Rights
Watch have documented how Israel has
still violated all those provisional
measures Walia fary is a professor of
political science at Long Island
University she joins us live from
Princeton in New Jersey a very warm
welcome to you Dalia so Cairo has been
as we've been saying a key mediator in
this conflict so far what is Egypt's
participation now of the icj alongside
South Africa mean for legal proceedings
there the world's highest
quot so this is really an unprecedented
moment in the history of the the modern
day history between Egypt and Israel
Egypt has been the most important
mediator in the region the first Arab
Nation to recognize and formalize ties
with Israel in
1979 and here is this moment the
symbolic moment where the Egyptian
government puts its foot down on on four
basic reasons and the first is the
humanitarian one that you cited where
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs says
that the intervention currently comes in
increasing severity and that Israel's
actions in Gaza leading to the deaths of
almost 40,000 individuals um violates
International humanitarian law and the
fourth con Geneva Convention um in terms
of protecting civilians um they also
talk and mention about the systemic
practices against Palestinians that are
leading to um starvation and the
provisional measures that the I the icj
had asked for that that would ensure
humanitarian relief actually be
instituted and so that's at the
humanitarian level now this moment has
deeper implications at the political
level because Israel has not proved
itself in the eyes of Egypt as a good
faith NE negotiator it didn't sign on to
the ceasefire agreement even though it
had mentioned that it would um also for
months Egyptian officials have stated
that an Israeli invasion of Rafa would
risk peace ties between the two
countries so it's more so than the iscj
r ruling it's also a blow to the ties
between the two countries because Israel
has violated they've they've actually
seized the border and and they've taken
tactical provisional authority over
border I just want I just wonder given
Israel's ability to ignore ignore those
provisional measures that all important
injunction that cease and desist order
at the icj so far if they're able to do
that given the pressure from South
Africa surely they're able to continue
doing that with Egypt in the mix as well
but this is more symbolic because the
ties between Egypt and all of the other
countes that had signed on with South
Africa are are different so Egypt would
be the closest Ally sharing a border
sharing a longstanding C Camp David
agreement um but but also Israel did
this one other thing to Egypt and
violating security by seizing
operational control of this border and
um creating instability right on on on
the border territory and so this
violation is also to the international
if you will status quo of stability and
so besides violating the rights of the
Palestinians it's also now violated
several International agreements that
have been held long held between Egypt
and Israel given cairo's long and
historical relationship with with the
United States I wonder how much of a
blessing possibly Washington has given
to this move by
Egypt it's unclear but we did see um
secretary blink's statement today which
has been the harshest towards Israel
saying that any ground Invasion um would
be not just a violation but there would
be no guarantee of security of the
Palestinians and so um today's statement
from from Egypt actually signing on as
well as secretary blinken um statement
do indicate a a possible change however
is Isel going to heed this we know that
there are reports of 300 tanks that have
entered Rafa already so it's not clear
that any of this will lead to to a
behavioral change yeah just talking
specifically about Rafa so apparently
the US will not withhold weapons unless
there is evidence of a fullscale assault
in Rafa but given of course that we've
seen air strikes on a near daily basis
we've seen uh dozens of people losing
their life in in Rafa over the past few
days I mean how consistent how coherent
is this us position right
now the the US position has been deeply
problematic and inconsistent um we know
that the reports from the hospitals that
have been emptied and and that there
have been not just violations of human
rights but gross violations of human
rights bodies found buried alive and and
handcuffed to the back that the
violations that we've seen today the
world has not seen in decades and
decades the world had not seen really
since post in post in the post World War
II era and so these violations that are
coming to light as well as the blanket
um elimination of media from the
territory the the closing down of Al
jaaz as well this is kind of what
happens in darkness is worse than what
happens in light and so again we don't
know what will happen what we don't what
we do know that's already been
documented is these gross violations of
human rights and of the Geneva
Convention just putting this um lastly
into a historical context because you
mentioned those all important Camp David
Accords back in 1979 normalizing
relations defining the border between
Israel and Egypt I just wonder whether
all of this is the start of a great
unraveling of that historical
moment it it possibly is we're we're
seeing the brink of of World War III
possibly and and not to sound hyperbolic
it's because For the First time we're
watching for example Nations like the
United States like the United Kingdom
act in ways that are against their own
National Security the Camp David was
signed because of not just the security
and sanctity of Israel but also to
secure us interests in the region
flyover rights over Sinai the Suez Canal
counterterrorism cooperation and so is
really in the best interest of the
United States as well and here we see
for the first time in recent modern
history countries like the US acting
against their own National Security
interests and so as we continue down
this path we don't heed the warnings
perhaps we are entering into a myad
where International Norms of rules based
um International World Order are going
to unravel and what we've seen in the
past few months since January since
South Africa brought this to the icj is
that it is third world countries if you
will who have been trying to uphold the
rules-based world order in spite of the
Western World great unraveling of the
international World Order Dal of fari
many thanks for joining us on Al
jaer thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
zero